Hi, my name is David Khourshid, and
I'm really excited to give this workshop
on Frontend Masters about CSS animations.
So I've been a web developer for
over ten years.
And I've been actually really
passionate about CSS animations,
frontend technologies, and
cutting edge user interfaces.
So one of my favorite things to
do is actually take dribbles and
recreate them in just pure CSS.
And that's something that I did a long
time ago right when I was starting to
learn JavaScript, but
I was still pretty new to it, and
I really wanted to get good at CSS.
So here's an example of a CSS-only weather
app concept that I did a few years ago.
You could see we have clouds moving,
rain falling, snow falling as well.
And so I basically took a dribble
that I really liked, and
there's a ton of animations that
are just really, really interesting.
And I challenged myself to see how
I could do this with just CSS or
CSS and only a sprinkling of JavaScript.
And so
it's been a really fun hobby of mine.
I tried to take it to the extreme,
even doing things like creating
a calendar app with only CSS.
So I continued on this journey.
And the more I learned about
JavaScript and how it could be used and
sprinkled onto these animations,
the more creative potential that I saw for
the types of animations
that you could create.
So I also really got into state machines.
And I do have some courses on
Frontend Masters about X-state and
state machines that I really
encourage you to check out,
because state machines are actually
really related to animations as well.
Take this choose or
design your week example.
We could select the days of the week,
throw them away.
I could extend Sunday
to as long as I want.
And so doing this with just CSS,
of course, is pretty much impossible.
And even doing it with
JavaScript is pretty hard,
unless you understand the techniques
of doing state-based animations and
modeling your states and transitions.
So that you could cleanly
define the animations between
states in a way that's actually easily
maintainable and understandable.
So I will be going over
that in this workshop, and
we're gonna be going over
a lot of things actually.
One of the things we're gonna be going
over is also layouts animations,
which are actually pretty common, but
they're not the easiest to implement.
So I'm really excited to talk about
techniques that we could use for
doing that.
And at the end of the workshop,
we're also going to be talking
about reactive animations too.
So this is a more advanced concept that
leans more on JavaScript rather than CSS.
But we are going to be learning principles
of how we could use JavaScript and
CSS together, so that they're not
fighting with each other, but
rather they're collaborating.
So that we could share these dynamic
values between both realms, and
create some really cool
animations as a result.
So for a while, I've been actually doing
a live stream called the keyframers
about every week or every other week
with my friend, Steven Shaw, in Texas.
And so on the keyframers,
we make animations from dribbles,
basically, that we just find really
interesting, like I talked about.
And so we would take these animations.
And in a one to two-hour stream, we would
try to recreate them from scratch, and
that's basically going to be
the feel of this workshop.
We're going to be just working
on the animations with HTML,
CSS, and just a little bit of JavaScript.
There's gonna be no frameworks in here,
and
we're actually also
going to be using SCSS,
which is a Sass preprocessor language
that really looks and feels like CSS.
If you don't know SCSS, then don't worry,
because you could use normal CSS in SCSS,
and it's going to work just fine.
But we'll explain some of the SCSS
specific things in this workshop.
So why are CSS animations important?
It seems like something that we
could just sprinkle on to websites.
And it always seems like an afterthoughts
too, just because CSS animations and
animations in general aren't really
often talked about when we're
talking about designing websites or
implementing functionality.
But they're actually really important.
In general,
animations bring user interfaces to life.
And that's why I really enjoy
when I see a website or
a web app with some thoughtful,
meaningful animations.
And that's important,
because animations need to be subtle.
But they also need to be meaningful,
in that they guide the user to doing
something, or to indicating what can
be done, or to telling the user,
this is something that just happened.
And so this is important for
the explainability aspect.
When a user is using your application,
they want to understand in
an intuitive way just what is
happening in the app or the website.
And so there is a lot of examples of
websites that really do this well.
I really like Linear,
both their landing pages.
And also the actual web
app has some really
nice subtle animations that really
clue in onto this just disappeared,
this just appeared, this came from here,
this is going there.
It really brings that extra layer
polish to the user interface,
and to the user experience as well.
Stripe, of course,
is another great example.
Of course,
their menu is just beautiful to look at.
And also they have nice subtle
animations on things like buttons,
where you could see the arrow
is sort of moving to the right.
And so this is the kind of thing that
really makes you trust the software that
you're using and
also brings delight to the user, so
that they're encouraged to use the
websites and the applications a lot more.
And you could get really
whimsical with this.
So this is the Superlist website,
where it's having a lot of fun
with some reactive animations.
And it also indicates what this
app is about in terms of feel.
So we could see that this app is
just something like a notepad,
where we have these pen marks,
and these are even animated.
So if we scroll down, you could see
just different things being highlighted.
And yeah, so
this is a great example of animation too,
where it doesn't have to be sterile or
super subtle.
It really depends on what kind
of design you wanna go for.
But the main point is that I
really want you to make designs or
animations that are meaningful and
delightful and also not too obtrusive.
And one of the biggest reasons I'm giving
this workshop too is because animation and
motion design, in general,
should be part of the way
that you think about designing and
implementing user interfaces.
And in fact, a lot of the techniques that
we're gonna talk about apply to just
better CSS techniques in general,
even if you're not using animations.
So let's talk about what we're
going to be working from.
The repo is at
github.com/davidkpiano/frontend-masters--
CSS.
So you could find it on my GitHub, and
this is a basic HTML,
CSS, and JavaScript app.
Of course,
we're using Sass as a preprocessor, but
you could use CSS if you want to,
it's going to work just the same.
To get started, you just run npm
install in the root of this repo,
and then npm run dev.
So what this is going to do is it's going
to start our app at localhost:3000,
where there's a bunch of lessons in here,
and also an in-flight example.
So this is what it's going to look like.
We have all the lessons on the main
page over here, and a ball over here,
and this is going to be
useful as a scratchpad.
So in case you want to try any of the
animation techniques that we talked about,
go to index.html or
style.scss on the root of this repo, and
you could animate this ball.
And we're gonna be working
from this scratch pad,
index page a lot in this workshop.
So we're going to be
making a few examples.
One of them is this signup form,
where we're going to be adding some subtle
animations to it,
including state-based animations.
And of course,
you could get as whimsical as you want.
We're also going to be talking
about layout animations too.
So things such as when you don't have
a defined position or size, and you need
to read that from JavaScript and smoothly
animate from one state to another.
We're gonna be talking about
techniques for doing that.
We're also going to be talking, of course,
about reactive animations, such
as this one that uses the lerp technique
to follow the mouse cursor around.
And then finally, we're going to be
seeing how we could apply these kinds of
animations to a real world app,
or at least, a shell of one.
So this uses state-based animations,
transitions, and
things like that, in order to give
this app a nice, smooth feel.
So I just want to remind you
that this workshop, of course,
is about CSS animations, which means
that it is a creative workshop.
There's no right or wrong answers.
And the main points in this workshop
that I want you to take away is all
the different animation techniques and
principles.
Including how to do transitions,
animations, how to use a JavaScript
to communicate with CSS in order to
create any animation you would like.
And the exercises we're going to be
doing in this workshop, like I said,
there's no wrong answers.
So I really encourage you to be creative,
and
add whatever kinds of animations
that you would like in there.